Are UK interest rates forecast to rise in 2016? Here's what economists predict
MARKETS predict that UK interest rates 2017 are to stay frozen until 2017, but top economists believe that a hike will take place at some point in 2016.
An increase in rates has been pushed further into the distance by financial markets after it was recently revealed that Britain's economy growth is slowing.
UK GDP increased by just 0.5 per cent in the third quarter of 2015, which led to swap markets to push back expectations for the first hike to April 2017.
Just a few months ago the Bank of England (BoE) policymakers suggested that British households should prepare their mortgages and other bills for gradual hikes from around the start of 2016.
But rates now look far more likely to stay at 0.5 per cent well into next year, with one of the Bank's top economists even saying another cut could take place before families see a rise.
The rate is set on a monthly basis by the BoE's Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) and only rises when the nine members agree that a hike should take place.
At the moment opinions are split, with just one member, Ian McCafferty, voting for am immediate hike.
Those who argue for an increase point, in part, to Britain's continued financial recovery seen through strong employment and wage data.
In a recent speech, Mr McCafferty explained how he believes that rates should start to increase at a graudal rate in line with the economy.
He said: "As the crisis-induced headwinds start to diminish, and the economy begins to normalise, it would be reasonable to expect the neutral interest rate – the level of interest rates consistent with full employment and inflation at target – to also move towards more normal levels."
However, another member of the MPC, Andy Haldane, said that the Bank’s next move could to be to cut rates rather than raise them.
The UK's low inflation, which turned negative in September, is part of the reason that the MPC is in no hurry to raise rates.
And slowing growth is likely to be another factor. 
Although no one knows when exactly rates are going to rise it is largely agreed that the increases - when they come - will be gradual.
The UK's core rate has been at 0.5 per cent since 2009 when the financial crisis struck, and during this time UK savers have struggled to get a decent return on their cash.
Here is what leading economists have recently predicted:
Schroders' senior European economist, Azad Zangana, said: "The slowdown in UK growth is by no means a disaster, but it will put pressure on the Bank of England to delay the first rate hike, especially as inflation remains in negative territory. 
"We continue to forecast no change in interest rates until May 2016."
Ruth Miller, uk economist at Capital Economics, said: "Although the renewed bout of deflation looks set to be short and sweet, the MPC may want to be sure that second-round effects on inflation expectations are not taking hold before tightening policy. 
"So while financial markets have probably gone too far in pushing back expectations for the first rate hike until the first quarter of 2017, a rise before Q2 2016 still seems unlikely in our view. "