Interest rates predictions on the move: 'First rise in December 2016'
Briefing: Predictions have been shifting wildly again. We explain why - and what it means for mortgages and savings
Bank Rate, at 0.5pc for more than six years, looks set to remain fixed until well into 2016, according to markets. It could be far longer, as we explain below.
Take a look at the Bank of England channel for in-depth coverage of the Bank's latest views on the economy. Below we boil it down to the predictions and explain what it all means for savings and mortgages.
This guide is updated as events change: Follow rate alerts on Twitter
What are the latest predictions?
Following the MPC meeting and publication of the Bank of England Inflation Report on November 5, the markets pushed the forecast for the first rise further back.
As the chart below shows, the prediction for the first rate rise keeps getting pushed back. It is now around December 2016. Rates could even be cut.
In July, markets believed a rate rise would happen within six months. But then the Black Monday crash in August undermined confidence. This was followed by the decision in late September not to increase rates in the US.
The UK economy is looking less rosy than a few months ago. Consumer confidence has fallen and GDP growth is slowing. Deflation also returned in September again in coming months.
At one point, due to all this, the markets even predicted a rate hike might not come until April 2017.
Vicky Redwood of Capital Economics said: "At the same time as giving this generally dovish message, though, the MPC sent a warning to markets that they have lowered their rate expectations too far. The Inflation Report forecasts are based on rate expectations in the 15 working days to 28 October – which, on the Bank’s measure, were for the first rate rise to come in Q2 2017. Such a path, the MPC said in the minutes, would lead to modest excess demand, meaning that inflation is projected to be a bit above the 2pc target at the policy horizon.
"Indeed, Mr Carney said that the overshoot three years ahead was the biggest since 2005.
"That said, in the big picture, the overshoot is pretty mild. And market expectations had already corrected a bit in the past few days. On the measure of expectations we use, the first hike is now expected at the end of 2016. In fact, expectations fell back a bit after the MPC’s announcements.
"Overall, then, we remain comfortable with our view that rates will rise in Q2 next year (and subsequently increase very slowly). On the basis of today’s forecasts alone, it is even possible that rates will not rise until the second half of next year. Note, also, that the Governor made a point today of reiterating the MPC’s view that asset purchases will not start to be reversed until Bank Rate returns to around 2pc. The MPC is clearly in no hurry to start tightening policy."
It should also be noted that Bank of England chief economist Andy Haldane, arch dove of the monetary policy committee, said in September that the case for UK raising interest rates is "some way from being made" and that negative rates may still be needed.
The chart below shows the market's prediction for the first rise in rates. It is explained in more depth below.
How quickly will rates rise?
Even after the first rise, the market is pricing in only very slow increases, far slower than seen in previous cycles of rising rates (set out in the chart below), expecting a return to 3pc not until 2025.
In October, Capital Economics said it expected a rate of 1pc by the end of next year and 1.5pc by the end of 2017.
The Bank of England's quarterly Inflation Report (November 5) captured recent market predictions suggesting a notional rate of 1.1pc by the end of 2016, 1.7pc by the end of 2017 and 2.3pc by the end of 2018.
Some analysts have said rates may not rise until 2017.