Interest rates: borrowing costs will not change – for now
Bank of England passes all UK lenders in latest stress test, but may demand £10bn boost to reserves
Buyers of second homes, those taking out personal loans and investors in high street bank shares that rely on the regular dividend income stream can all breath a sigh of relief this morning.
The Bank of England revealed the results of its latest annual 'stress tests', which assess the resilience of the largest lenders in the UK to a major financial shock, alongside the bi-annual review of its Financial Policy Committee of threats to the financial system more widely.
It had been expected that it would ask the six banks (Barclays, HSBC, Lloyds, Royal Bank of Scotland, Standard Chartered and Santander UK) and building society Nationwide to hold a 'countercyclical buffer' of 0.5 per cent, says Reuters.
This is an extra sum of reserves that lenders are asked to put aside in benign economic times to protect against future troubles, which was introduced during the downturn but remains at zero.
There were also expectations it might ask for more money to be specifically set aside against certain types of lending, for example mortgages to private landlords and personal loans, which have been growing rapidly in recent months.
But while the Bank passed all of the lenders in the stress tests and said the banking system is now out of the immediate post-crisis phase during which risks were heightened, it decided to delay taking action this time around.
It put banks on notice, however, that it is likely to require a countercyclical buffer of one per cent to be held - and could begin to up the rate from March next year.
The Guardian says this will mean as much as £10bn extra will need to be set aside. "Some banks may need to raise fresh capital, others may be able to re-jig their finances to meet any extra requirements," the paper adds.
The effects could include higher interest rates on loans to customers to cover the higher capital expense, or a reduction in dividend payouts.
Barclays had been thought to be in the firing line due to the size of its investment bank - and its shares surged four per cent this morning.
RBS shares jumped more than three per cent, despite the bank being singled out as one of the weaker institutions in the tests, while Lloyds has risen 2.5 per cent.